# sturdy-octo-potato

Eye Controlled Mouse

ABSTRACT

An individual Human computer interference system is being introduced. In olden times, as an input device the mouse and keyboard were used by human computer interference system. Those people who are suffering from certain disease or illness cannot be able to operate computers. The idea of controlling the computers with the eyes will serve a great use for handicapped and disabled person. Also this type of control will eliminate the help required by other person to handle the computer. This measure will be the most useful for the person who is without hands through which they can operate with the help of their eye movements.  We can accurately detect the movement of eye by detecting the position of iris present in our eyes this can be done by converting the recorded image into edges and counters  this is used to give the best possible outcomes of the eye position is detected by webcam so that the eye movements is detected and the mouse moves accordingly. It enables the user to open and close the applications by blinking of the eye. It will also help a person to scroll the pages down and up.
   Controlling the mouse by a physically challenged person is really a tough one. To find a solution for the people who cannot use the Mouse physically, we have proposed this mouse cursor control using Eye Movements. Eye gaze is an alternative way of accessing a computer using eye movements to control the mouse. For someone who fine touchscreens, mouse inaccessible, eye gaze is an alternative method to allow a user to operate their computer, using the movement of their eyes.
            Eye movement can be regarded as a pivotal real-time input medium for human-computer communication, which is especially important for people with physical disability. In order to improve the reliability, mobility, and usability of eye tracking technique in user-computer dialogue, a novel eye control system is proposed in this system using Webcam and without using any extra hardware. The proposed system focuses on providing a simple and convenient interactive mode by only using user’s eye. The usage flow of the proposed system is designed to perfectly follow human natural habits. The proposed system describes the implementation of both iris and movement of cursor according to iris position which can be used to control the cursor on the screen using webcam and implemented using Python.
            
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76660222/209459012-19879fb9-8618-4d5b-8795-d7d3e59436b7.png)
            
            
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76660222/209459017-c308b1fb-abfe-4292-83d7-b13ec839f455.png)



The main goal of developing this
project is to provide hands free cursor control which reduces the dependency on
mouse we mainly focused on physically disabled persons who cannot use they
hands to operate the system. doesn’t perform well in poor lightening
environment.

In this paper a computer vision
algorithm primarily based answer is enforced. an endeavour has been created
towards development of low value, period answer for eye gaze trailing. There
are several applications of eye gaze trailing, as an example in HCI, appliances
management, usability studies and in advertising effectiveness. Accuracy for
options extraction algorithms depends upon image quality and lighting
conditions. algorithmic rule performance drops down in poor lighting setting.
higher image quality would improve accuracy of laptop vision algorithms.
refined Pre-Processing algorithms ought to be introduced to compensate lighting
variations and web-cam resolution ought to even be multiplied to decrease the
pointer size. A feature describing head-posture should even be introduced,
it'll enable the user to maneuverer freely whereas interacting with system.
Introducing the construct of gaze estimation in conjunction with gaze
projection are going to be useful as a result of it'll improve gaze projections
drastically. the thought of gaze estimation guarantees to be told from usage
statistics and infer gaze projections. Particle Filters will be accustomed
implement gaze estimation as a result of they're quite straightforward and has
likeness with drawback of gaze estimation

The face is not rotated more than
5° around the axis that passes from the nose tip in detection mode for accurate
localization of eyes and nose (as long as the eyes fall in sectors S1 and S3 of
the SSR filter). The face is not rotated more than 30° around the axis that
passes from the neck for accurate localization of eyes and nose. Our detecting
methodology is unaffected by the use of glasses. When it comes to different
scales, it's advisable to stand about 35 cm away from the webcam. When the
frame rate is 20 fps or above, the results in tracking mode are quite stable;
the user can move extremely quickly without the program losing his facial
features. The glasses reflect light and create bright spots, causing our
program to lose track of the eyes on occasion. Because side light causes
erroneous face detection and subsequently affects the tracking process, the
lighting conditions must be tuned so that the light is frontal and spreads
uniformly across the face for accurate and robust detection and tracking.

A system that enables a disabled
person to interact with the computer was successfully developed and tested. The
method can be further enhanced to be used in many other applications. The
system can be adapted to help the disabled to control home appliances such as
TV sets, lights, doors etc. The system can also be adapted to be used by
individuals suffering from complete paralysis, to operate and control a
wheelchair. The eye mouse can also be used to detect drowsiness of drivers in
order to prevent vehicle accidents. The eye movement detection and tracking
have also potential use in gaming and virtual reality.
